feat: ✨ decision post on why to use Cocogitto (#277)
seedcase-project/decisions: why-semantic-release-with-cocogitto/index.qmd

---
title: "Why Cocogitto for semantic release"
description: |
  Continuous delivery through using semantic releases reduces manual effort,

>   time, and potential errors. This post describes why we use Cocogitto for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  time, and potential errors. This post describes why we use Cocogitto for
```
? :)

  automated versioning and releasing of our software.
date: "2026-05-26"
categories:
  - communicate
  - organise
---

## Context and problem statement

We originally used [Commitizen](/why-semantic-release-with-commitizen/index.qmd)

> for automating our versioning and releasing, but as our needs and projects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for automating the versioning and releasing of our software, but as our needs and projects
```

evolved, we encountered many limitations with it. For example:

- It sometimes would release something that based on Conventional Commit

>   messages that shouldn't have triggered a release. Debugged didn't lead into

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It sometimes creates releases that, based on Conventional Commit
  messages, shouldn't have triggered a release. Debugging didn't lead into
```

>   any explanation on why this was happening.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  any explanation of why this was happening.
```

> - It didn't have a lot of configuration customisations that we needed for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It doesn't include a lot of the configuration customisations we need for our
```

>   diverse number of projects (e.g. websites, R packages) that we build and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  diverse projects (e.g. websites, R packages, and Python packages) that we build and
```

  maintain.
- With increasing supply chain attacks on package registers like PyPI and npm,

>   we wanted to use tools that were more secure and that had better security

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  we want to use tools that are more secure and that has better security
```

>   practices for these types of issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  practices.
```

- Commitizen's GitHub Action workflow was quite complicated and difficult to
  assess the security risk of and to debug. This was actually one of the biggest
  issues we had with it (related to the point about about triggering releases
  that shouldn't have been triggered) and a big reason for needing to switch to
  something else. For instance, the workflow requires passing a GitHub secret
  token to a Docker container, without the ability to modify or improve on that

>   practice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Commitizen's GitHub Action workflow is quite complicated making it difficult to
  assess the security risk of and to debug. This is one of the biggest
  issues for us (related to the point about about triggering releases
  that shouldn't have been triggered) and a big reason for needing to switch to
  something else. For instance, the workflow requires passing a GitHub secret
  token to a Docker container, without the ability to modify or improve on that
  practice.
```

Two things: 
1) IF this is the main thing, maybe move it up as the first point in the list
2) The last part feels like a bit of a summary and feels a bit misplaced in the list; maybe move parts of it down to the conclusion at L36?

So we needed to switch to something else.

## Decision drivers

::: content-hidden
List some reasons for why we need to make this decision and what things have
arisen that impact work.
:::

We already described a lot of available tooling in our [previous

> post](/why-semantic-release-with-commitizen/index.qmd), so we won't cover those

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We already described a lot of available tooling in our 
[post on using Commitizen for semantic releases](/why-semantic-release-with-commitizen/index.qmd), so we won't cover those
```

> again (unless they changed substantially). We need a tool that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
here (unless they change substantially). 

We need a tool that:
```

- Has a simple, easily reviewing GitHub Action workflow, or at the least a way
  that makes it easy to use in a workflow, e.g. as a CLI command run through

>   `run`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Has a simple GitHub Action workflow that's easy to review, or at the least has a way
  that makes it easy to use in a workflow, e.g. as a CLI command run through
  `run`.
```

> - Built by a more secure language, and installable without depending on another

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Is built in a (more) secure language and is installable without depending on another
```

>   tool to install.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  tool.
```

> - Allows the use of GitHub's built-in `secrets` system in the workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allows the use of GitHub's built-in `secrets` system in its workflows.
```

- Can be used as a CLI tool, so that if a good GitHub Action workflow isn't a

>   barrier to using it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Can be used as a CLI tool, so that if there are no good GitHub Action workflows, it can still be used e.g. with `run` in the workflow.
```
Not sure I understand this sentence :)

- Has good configuration customisation for different types of projects.

## Considered options

::: content-hidden
List and describe some of the options, as well as some of the benefits and
drawbacks for each option.
:::

[Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/about/) keeps a

> good list of tools that make use of their standard, which is where what we used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
good list of tools that make use of their standard, which we used
```

> to find tools to compare and use. However, since the previous post, there is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to find tools to compare. However, since the previous post, there hasn't been any new tools and so there is
```
Not sure what is meant with "since the previous post" here? ☺️

really only one other option that fit our needs:

- [Cocogitto](https://docs.cocogitto.io/)

### Cocogitto

[Cocogitto](https://docs.cocogitto.io/) is a Rust CLI tool

::: columns
::::: column
#### Benefits

- Has very good customisations, including pre- and post-bump hooks that can run
  custom commands before and after the version is bumped.
- The GitHub Action workflow is very simple and doesn't require passing any
  secrets to it.

> - It's built in Rust, which is a more secure language.

Reviewer: more secure *than what*? :)

> - It's built in Rust, which is a more secure language.

Author: ```suggestion
- It's built in Rust, which is a more secure language than most other languages.
```

:::::

::::: column
#### Drawbacks

> - Isn't as frequently updated, though Rust packages don't require as much

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Isn't frequently updated, though Rust packages don't require as much
```

  maintenance as Python or JavaScript ones, so this might not be an issue.
- Custom pre- and post-bump hooks mean we have to write custom commands
  ourselves, which could be more work compared to using a tool that has more
  built-in functionality.
:::::
:::

## Decision outcome

::: content-hidden
What decision was made, use the form "We decided on CHOICE because of REASONS."
:::

> We didn't have any choices here, as there was really only one tool that fit our

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We didn't have any choice here, as there was really only one tool that fit our
```

> needs. But, Cocogitto is a well-developed tool that fits what we need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
needs. But, Cocogitto is a well-developed tool that fits our needs.
```
